[Music]
well thanks Martin very generous
introduction that's very kind of you um
so it was actually five and a half years
ago almost now that CERN announced the
world they discovered a new what they
cautiously described at the time as a
new boson which we've now sort of fairly
confidently concluded is at least a
Higgs boson and around that time
suddenly particle physics was all over
the news Brian Cox was wheeled into
every television studio to explain to
slightly bemused looking TV anchors what
spontaneous symmetry breaking was and
then and then everyone sort of moved on
with their lives and forgot about us and
you might be forgiven for thinking that
actually we put our feet up at CERN and
just had a holiday for the last five
years cuz it hasn't really been another
big breakthrough at least not one that's
got in the news so what I want to talk
to you about today is what we actually
have been up to and particularly there's
something quite is right it's true there
hasn't been a really big breakthrough
yet but just in the last year or two
there have been some really intriguing
signs that we might be and being very
cautious about this we might be about to
discover something really quite profound
so this is CERN which is the European
Organization for Nuclear Research just
outside Geneva it's a sort of the size
of a lot of small town population of
CERN at any one time is about two and a
half thousand people there about seven
thousand physicists from around the
world who are involved in research there
and it's got everything that a small
town should have it's got a restaurant
it's got a post office travel agents
it's um got hotels it's a kind of town
populated exclusively though by particle
physicists you can kind of imagine what
that must be like this was the scene in
the main auditorium at CERN on the 4th
of July 2012 now this is as excited as
you will ever see particle physicists
getting they were sort of clapping
cheering you know people punching the
air one of the people in the crowd
described it as being like had a
football match I'm not sure he'd ever
been to a football match
but I mean it was certainly very
lively by physics standards and this is
what they were all cheering as a bump so
physicists get very excited about bumps
this is if you want to know what Higgs
boson looks like this is basically what
Higgs boson looks like it looks like a
bump in a graph so I'll explain actually
what this shows a bit later in the
lecture but really the thing you're
looking for here is there's this
smoothie falling line and then there's
this little tiny XS here and that was
the smoking gun telling us that there
was a new particle that had been found
which over the last few years has been
almost certainly confirmed to be the
Higgs boson that Peter Higgs predicted
back in 1964 so what is a Higgs boson
you might ask and that's very reasonable
question so I'm going to very briefly
take you on a quick tour of particle
physics to try and understand what this
thing actually is so let's start with
maybe something slightly more familiar
this is the periodic table of the
chemical elements which dates back to
the 19th century so at the end of the
19th century are sort of well the
understood theory of what the universe
is made from is there are you know more
than a hundred different chemical
elements and thanks to Dalton's atomic
theory what that's what he said was that
for every element hydrogen helium
lithium and so on
there was a atom which was a fundamental
indivisible indestructible little thing
that and you had different atoms one for
every element so that was a sort of
Victorian view of the nature of matter
now so here's your atom then it the turn
of the 20th century so 1897 actually the
Canada story where I work
I knew a particle was discovered the
first elementary particle that we we
found called the electron and that led
over the next few years to a revision of
the structure of the atoms the atoms as
I said before was thought to be
something hard indestructible
indivisible when the electron was
discovered that was revised and we get
the model of the atom that we all learn
about in school which is a nucleus which
contains most of the mass of the atom
and that's positively charged and around
the atom go these electrons now the
periodic table if you look at it in the
way that the elements were arranged
there are there's a certain there are
certain patterns in the properties of
the different chemical elements so for
example if you look at the group one
elements they all tend to have react in
similar ways
and they get more reactive as you go
down but there are clear patterns in the
way the elements are arranged and that
was sort of indicative of some deeper
structure and this is the deeper
structure so essentially you can explain
the properties of all these different
elements by different numbers of
electrons going around the outside of
atoms and electrons are what determine
the chemical properties of that
particular element now this isn't the
end of the story so if you zoom into the
nucleus it was discovered in sort of the
nineteen 1930s that the nucleus itself
is made of smaller things and these are
called protons and neutrons so these are
smaller part smaller particles which
make up most of the mass of the atom the
proton is positively charged the neutron
is electrically neutral they're much
much heavier than electrons are about
two thousand times more massive than
electrons now this may be where you're
sort of school physics ended possibly
but in the 1960s if you discover that
actually protons and neutrons themselves
are not fundamental they're made of even
smaller things and those smaller things
what we call quarks quarks depending on
your taste so the proton is made of two
up quarks which are these red triangles
and one down quark and the neutron is
made of two down quarks and one up quark
and that's it so that basically says
that all of matter every atom in the
universe everything that we know about
is made up actually of just three
different elementary particles
so you have the electron first of all
discovered by JJ Thompson in Cambridge
in 1897 you've got and the two quarks
the up quark and the down quark
so everything that exists is made of
just these three things so you are just
quarks and electrons arranged in a
rather peculiar way essentially and
these are the first three particles of
what we call the standard model now the
standard model of particle physics is a
rather boring name for something quite
extraordinary it's really the closest we
have to a complete description of the
universe at the fundamental level the
only thing well it misses quite a few
things actually but the main thing that
you might be familiar with that it
doesn't include is gravity but other
than that it's got it pretty well pinned
down so you've got these three particles
that make up all the matter that we are
made of then there's something else that
gets added to this table called a
neutrino neutrinos are sort of like
ghosts they're they're these invisible
and
almost almost undetectable particles
there are trillions of them going
through you right now they're produced
by the Sun in vast quantities that go
straight through you straight through
the earth and they very very rarely
interact with the ordinary matter that
we're made out of so that's why we're
not really that aware of the existence
of neutrinos most of the time so this
column of four particles makes up what
we call the first generation of matter
now for some reason which we do not
understand nature provided us with two
additional copies of these particles
there's something called the second
generation and in the second generation
all the particles are exactly the same
as in the first generation except
they're more massive and they're
unstable so for example the electron has
a sort of heavy cousin called the muon
which is about 200 times more massive
than the electron and the reason we
don't we're not made of muons and there
aren't muons hanging around is because
if you make a muon it will very quickly
decay into an electron and some
neutrinos so these second generation
particles don't hang around very long
they're unstable but you can make them
in high-energy collisions like at the
LHC for example and then for start
another and then there's a third
generation which is even heavier so this
is these are what these are what is this
four by three twelve particles are the
matter particles so they make up the
kind of solid stuff of the universe
essentially or at least they would if
they weren't all unstable apart from
this first column and we do not know it
is a big mystery we do not know why
there are two extra columns in this
table it's a bit like the periodic table
in a way where you have this sort of
structure and you can see these patterns
but you don't actually understand yet
back in the nineteenth century what
underlies this but there's something
suggestive here something that sort of
hints that maybe there's some deeper
structure that could explain why we've
got this rather peculiar set of matter
particles and I'll come back to that in
a little bit and then the last
ingredient the standard model are the
force particles so there are three
fundamental forces in the standard model
probably the most familiar to you and
one that a lot of important work was
done in this building on is
electromagnetism
so by Faraday and Maxwell and various
others so that's the force that causes
electrons to stick to the nuclei of
atoms it binds atoms together it's
responsible for
chemistry is responsible for basically
most of the stuff that is important to
us and the particle that transmits the
electromagnetic interaction is the
photon the particle of light so light
itself is also an electromagnetic
phenomenon then there are two other or
three other particles which you may not
have heard of there's something called
the gluon which is the force particle of
something called a strong nuclear force
which is a force that binds quarks
together inside the atomic nucleus and
binds protons and neutrons together it's
called a glue one because it glues
things essentially and then there's two
rather weird ones called the w and z
particles and these are particles that
transmit a third force and even weirder
one called the weak nuclear force now
the weak nuclear force doesn't really
bind things together like
electromagnetism or the strong force
this force is responsible for causing
particles to decay so when a muon turns
into an electron that happens through
the weak force and I'll talk a bit more
about the weak force it's very important
the weak force although we don't really
notice it in our daily lives if it
wasn't there the Sun wouldn't be able to
fuse hydrogen into helium and there
would be no matter in the universe so
it's very important even though it's not
something we're very familiar with so
this is the standard model and this was
the standard model as had been sort of
studied and observed on the 3rd of July
2012 and on the 3rd of July 2012 there
was one piece missing which was this the
Higgs so what is this Higgs boson thing
and why is it so important well to
understand that we actually need to ask
a slightly deeper question which is what
do I actually mean by a particle so you
could be forgiven I sort of did the way
I've described this to you in the last
few minutes you could get the idea that
maybe these particles are somehow like
little Lego bricks or they're a bit like
the Victorian atoms they're sort of
solid little points that move around and
stick together but actually that's not
what modern particle physics tells us
particles are in fact particles aren't
really what matters at all it's with our
field is kind of badly named in sense
what actually we think of as being
fundamental or not particles but fields
so a field we've all probably if you've
ever held a magnet next to a piece of
steel or iron you've felt the effect of
a field so a field is something that
and cause for example a force to be
exerted over a distance where there's no
physical stuff actually causing that
force to be exerted so you have
something I feel can be certain for
uncle a magnetic field and that can you
know be strongly a magnet and get weaker
as you move further away or it could be
a gravitational field like the one that
the earth creates around it or the Sun
creates around there so we believe that
actually for every in particle physics
every one of these particles has an
Associated field so there is a field for
the quarks for the electrons for the
neutrinos and for all the force
particles and the way we think of these
particles are actually as little tiny
ripples moving through these fields so
this is a rather nice cartoon but my
colleagues at Cambridge
David Tong is a theoretical physicist so
here you've got your fields this kind of
blue sheet and then here you've got some
particles having a punch-up so they're
kind of these little localized
disturbances in these fields and that's
how we think of all matter so electrons
quarks everything are just little
ripples moving through these cosmic
energy fields that fill all of space are
everywhere which is quite a sort of
strange idea but that's really how we
think things are so coming back to the
Higgs what is the Higgs well the problem
existed in the 1960s when the standard
model was being put together it was
discovered that if you tried to make the
particles in the standard model massive
then the theory broke down it gives you
nonsensical answers so in particular
there was a particular problem with
these W and Z particles these particles
that transmit the weak nuclear force it
was known that if they existed they had
to be extremely massive but if you gave
them mass in the theory the theory gave
you nonsensical answers so there had to
be some solution to this and the
solution was essentially to invent
another field so just like the other
fields that these particles are ripples
moving about in well Peter Higgs
essentially said and actually five other
colleagues he was working with around
about the same time was imagine that
there is throughout the entire universe
an additional cosmic quantum field and
as these massive particles these things
that we think are massive moved through
it actually they are imbued with mass by
this field so for example the electron
which has a certain mass what the Higgs
mechanism tells a
is actually the electron is mass less
but by interacting with this cosmic
energy field it acquires the property of
mass so Higgs wrote his a paper in early
1964 and he had this idea which was
written down with very elegant
mathematics which looks a bit like this
and don't worry I won't try to explain
what this means and he sent it off to
the journal and he was rejected was
rejected they basically said this has
nothing whatsoever to do with physics
so Peter Higgs he has nice maths but you
know nothing to do with reality so Peter
Higgs went back to his paper and he said
well I need to connect this with
something that could be experimentally
measured and what he added to his paper
was actually basically one line that
said if this cosmic energy field that
gives mass to all the particles exists
then you should be able to create a
ripple or a disturbance in it which
would show up as a new particle and that
thing that ripple in the Higgs field is
what we call the Higgs the Higgs boson
so the thing that gives mass to all of
all to the particles we made of at least
is this field and the Higgs really is
the proof that this field is out there
and that's why finding it was so
important because the Higgs mechanism
this Higgs process by which the
particles get mass is absolutely
fundamental to the standard model it's
kind of like the keystone in an arch if
you take it away the whole theory just
falls in on itself so it was absolute
people were almost kind of convinced
actually is that this thing must be out
there and that's why finding it was so
so crucial and what everyone got so
excited back on that day on the 4th of
July so with the discovery of the Higgs
this completes this standard model of
particle physics that I've been telling
about and this theory is really a kind
of incredible achievement actually
because we can it can be used to pretty
much explain all the physics that we can
see around us so you can use this animal
in principle to describe everything from
you know why how a light bulb produces
photons to how atoms are fused together
inside stars it's the closest we have as
I said to a theory of everything and to
give you a sense of the power the
predictive power of this theory and this
is actually as I'm gonna tell you about
now is the best scientific prediction
anywhere in in science as far as I'm
aware so here's the electron now the
electron
as well as having electric charge also
behaves a bit like it's a tiny bar
magnet so it has a north and south pole
and it gives off a magnetic field and
you can use the standard model to
calculate how strong the electrons
little bar magnet should be and you can
do this to absolute fantastic precision
so essentially what you do is you use a
supercomputer you put the theory into
the computer and you calculate and you
get a number that looks like this one
one five nine six five two one eight
zero seven point three plus one is two
point eight times ten to the minus
thirteen there's a very small number but
very precisely calculated with a very
small uncertainty this is your
theoretical prediction now if you do a
very very clever experiment you can
measure this quantity is very very tiny
quantity two very high accuracy and this
is what you get one one five nine six
five two one eight one seven point eight
plus or minus seven point six so you can
see these numbers agree right down to
the last sort of three significant
figures and the difference between this
number and this number is within the
experimental uncertainty on this
measurement so this is a prediction and
a measurement accurate to one part in a
billion that is really kind of
extraordinary so that that tells you
that this standard model is definitely
on to something I mean you don't get
this kind of result by accident so it's
a really stunningly successful theory
but it is not without some problems and
these problems are actually what
motivated in part the building of the
Large Hadron Collider in the first place
as well as the discovery of the Higgs
which was really kind of closing the
chapter of 20th century physics what
everyone was actually really after well
a lot of people were after were answers
to some big unsolved questions that the
standard model cannot address now I'll
go back to this this picture so this is
actually an image taken by the Hubble
Space Telescope it's called the Hubble
Ultra Deep Field and what essentially it
is is where the telescope is pointed at
a very dark patch of sky where there are
almost no stars and it you wait for a
very long time and let for extra wait
for extremely faint light to build up on
the sensor of the telescope and
eventually this is the image that you
get so what you can see in this image
there are actually a few stars there the
things with the kind of cross twinky
patterns but everything else pretty much
is a galaxy these are extremely distant
galaxies
right sort of almost out to the edge of
as far as we can see with with
telescopes um so for example in the
center of image you can see there's a
kind of cluster of galaxies these kind
of blobs now hopefully you should be
able to also see that on this image
there is this smearing pattern so
there's kind of these circular
structures arranged around this central
cluster of galaxies now what this
smearing is is something called
gravitational lensing so this is
essentially where light from distant
galaxies travels towards the earth now
thanks to Einstein we know that gravity
doesn't just make matter move in orbits
or curves it also curved space-time and
it will cause light to travel in curved
paths so what's actually happening is
imagine you have your if you if i if
mike if i'm a galaxy is here and the
earth's over there and there's something
heavy in between me well neither galaxy
and the earth over there as the light
leaves the galaxy and travels past this
heavy object is bent by its gravity and
pulled back towards the earth again and
what you end up getting it basically
acts like a lens and you end up getting
this kind of smeared multiple image of
the same galaxy across the whole sky and
this lensing effect can actually
therefore be used to work out how much
matter there is in the center of this
image because the more gravity the more
mass there is here the more the more
strongly lens the light will be and the
more pronounced this effect will be so
what you can do is if you use this
lensing you can work out how much mass
effectively there is in the center of
this image and then you can compare that
with the visible light that you can see
so we can see there are lots of galaxies
here there's obviously a very large
amount of mass and what you actually
find though is that there's a very large
discrepancy between the amount of stuff
you can see with your optical telescopes
and the amount of stuff we know needs to
be there to explain this lensing effect
and if you map overlay a map of where
the matter appears to be in this image
from lensing this is what you get you
get this kind of bluish purple cloud
this is evidence of something called
dark matter which is essentially some
kind of invisible substance which we
don't know what it is
which apparently makes up a very large
fraction of the universe in fact it's
far far more abundant than the atomic
matter the stuff the standard model
describes basically I mean this dark
matter actually so you have evidence of
dark matter from lensing you also have
evidence of dark matter from simulations
like this which show how the universe
formed in the early stages and
essentially you find that if you want to
show how structure in universe formed
you need dark matter if you don't put
dark matter into your simulations then
you don't get a universe that looks like
the one we live in this is from the
illustrious simulation group was rather
lovely thing anyway you can sort of see
galaxies bursting to life and stars
turning on things very pretty but you
need the dark matter to make this work
and to agree with what we see out there
in the sky and through these kinds of
techniques through lensing and also by
looking at the rotations of stars around
galaxies you can calculate to a fairly
high degree of confidence how much dark
matter is out there even though we can't
see it and this is what you get this is
our cosmic pie and essentially what you
see rather extraordinarily is this slice
here which I've labeled atoms which is
basically us and everything that we can
see when we look up at the sky so all
the galaxies and stars and planets in
the universe and everything the standard
model describes is just 5% of the total
content of the universe 27% of it so
more than five times more of the
universe is made of this invisible dark
matter stuff and we don't know what that
is and then 68% is something called dark
energy and we really don't know what
that is so dark energy is some kind of
mysterious repulsive force that appears
to be causing the universe to expand at
an ever-increasing rate so the lesson
from this is essentially when you hear
the word dark in physics you should get
very suspicious because it basically
means we don't know what we're talking
about and this is really an extrordinary
in you've constructed this what seems to
be the stunningly successful theory over
a century with all these clever
experiments and clever theories and then
you realize that what you've been
describing is actually only a tiny
fraction of the total content of the
universe so in this extraordinary
position of having a theory that works
really really really well in the very
narrow domain in which we've applied it
but tells us basically nothing about
ninety-five percent of what's out there
so
is definitely a bit of a an omission I
suppose you could say in the standard
model there are other problems as well
so we don't know what ninety-five
percent in universe is pretty big
another one is to do with something
called antimatter so that table I showed
you the beginning with all the matter
particles the quarks the electrons and
their their cousins and the neutrinos
for every one of these particles there
is a sort of a mirror image particle and
this was actually this has been known
about for very long time it was
discovered back in the 1930s predicted
by someone called Paul Dirac and then
discovered in experiments very shortly
afterwards every particle in this table
has I said has a mirror image where all
the properties are exactly the same but
the electric charge is the other way
around so for example the electron which
is negatively charged has a positively
charged version called the positron or
the anti electron depending on what you
prefer and there's your muons anti muon
there's the up quark and the ante up
quark the down quark the anti down quark
and so on and these are also part of the
standard model we know these things
exist they can be created very reliably
in experiments their properties are
studied and we know they're out there
and we know also know that they are
actually indistinguishable from the
matter particles except for their
charges being the other way around now
this is a bit of a problem actually
because if you naively apply this sort
of understanding of matter antimatter to
the formation of the universe then this
is what happens so at the Big Bang you
have a huge amount of energy and that
energy is converted into matter and
antimatter and in the standard model
whenever you make a matter particle you
also have to make the corresponding
antimatter particle so if you make an
electron you also make with it the
positron and there's this called me kind
of maelstrom all these particles anti
particles being created and at the same
time as they're being created there also
bumping back into each other and
annihilating and turning back into light
so this interchange between energy and
matter and antimatter is boiling and
boiling away and then eventually what
happens is the universe expands enough
that it cools down low enough that all
the matter/antimatter meet up annihilate
and you lit what you're left with is a
cold dark and lifeless universe with a
few photons whizzing through the
infinite blackness
this is what the standard model says the
universe should look like this is what
the universe looks like though so
copyright Lucasfilm so the existence of
staff and us and galaxies is a bit of an
inconvenience if you're a theorist
because yeah we can't really understand
that either so then there must be some
kind of process by which you can allow a
little bit more matter to survive this
cosmic annihilation at the beginning of
the universe and actually you can you
can work out how big that imbalance has
to be only has to be very very tiny if
you look at the the sky and count
essentially the number of photons
whizzing through space there's a rough
correspondence between how many photons
there are out there and how many
particles antiparticles our nile ated at
the beginning because every annihilation
more or less creates two photons there
are about a billion photons for every
atom in the universe and what that tells
us that we really we are we are one
billionth leftover of a much larger
amount of stuff that was there at the
beginning but we don't know how this
billionth survived it shouldn't be there
by rights it should have all been wiped
out and we shouldn't be here so that's
two big problems that there's the fact
we don't know 95% of the universe is and
also the theory tells us the universe
shouldn't exist so two big problems I'll
come up to a third one and this is this
is one that's probably motivated a lot
of theoretical physicists particularly
almost since war since Einstein really
in the 20s and 30s so this is a problem
to do with gravity now gravity as it
turns out although it feels quite strong
it sticks us to the floor if you fall
out a window it hurts quite a lot it's
actually terribly weak it's a
fantastically weak force and this
cartoon illustrates that point so we
have the earth which is pretty but
pretty large by any standard and it's
got a gravitational attraction and it's
pulling on this paperclip I can use a
very weak fridge magnet which is only
this big to pick up that paper clip so
that magnet is overcoming the
gravitational attraction of this huge
ball of rock you know many many many
times more you know larger in terms of
mass so that tells us essentially that
the electromagnetic force is way way way
stronger than gravity if you had a
magnet the size of the earth it would be
fantastically powerful you can compare
these two so
if we say that electromagnetism has a
strength of 1 then gravity strength is
this 10 to the minus 36 more or less I
won't read that one out and this is a
real puzzle this why is there such a
huge hierarchy between gravity and the
other forces so the strong the weak and
electromagnetism are all way way way
stronger than gravity and we don't
understand why that is either so there
are lots of problems potentially it's
not some very big problems and that's
what in large part the LHC was built to
try and to try and solve fortunately
though there are some possible theories
out there that could explain some of
these and one of the most popular is an
idea called supersymmetry
now supersymmetry the essential idea is
to invoke a new kind of symmetry in
nature and it's a symmetry rather odd
symmetry so it's not really like this
mirror image of antimatter but it's kind
of comparable to it I suppose so in
supersymmetry there is a symmetry
between the matter particles so that's
things like the quarks and the electrons
and the neutrinos and the force
particles which are the gluons the
photons and the weak particles and the
Higgs as well and in supersymmetry every
matter particle gets a force particle
partner and every force particle gets a
matter particle partner so you end up
with an extra table of particles that
look like this they all have really
stupid names so basically if you want to
know what particles name is in
supersymmetry you add an S to the front
of it so the electron becomes this
electron the muon becomes this mule you
get I think worst of all possibly is the
strange quark
anyway there should be some kind of
Commission to name things I don't know
how this happens they're called
sparticles it sounds very silly the way
I've described it is very clever as
supersymmetry though I don't do it done
but supersymmetry is actually I mean
it's sort of the interest in
supersymmetry began in the 80s and it's
been the most popular extension of the
standard model for a very very long time
and that's because it's incredibly good
at solving some of these problems that
I've described to you so in particular
dark matter so
one of the reasons that supersymmetry is
very popular with particle physicists is
that often the lightest sparticles is
stable and often it's also electrically
neutral and that's exactly what you want
for dark matter
so I said dark matter is invisible and
that's because it doesn't reflect absorb
or emit light and things that don't emit
absorb or reflect lights are
electrically neutral so you have an
electrically neutral particle that
doesn't interact with photons it could
well make up the dark matter in the
universe so that's one reason for liking
supersymmetry another one there's a sort
of obsession in physics which is to try
to unify things to simplify complicated
phenomena into one sort of single
underlying phenomena and that's true
with the forces particularly and
unifying the different forces in physics
has been a sort of ongoing quests in as
well since Maxwell unified electricity
and magnetism in his equations back in
the 19th century so this is a rather
confusing graph unfortunately is I
didn't always produce this way but it's
upside down but basically what you've
got here this axis is the strength of
the three different forces in the
standard model except they get stronger
as you go down rather than going up but
I worry about that too much now if you
do experiments and measure the strength
of these forces what you find rather
curiously is that the strength of the
forces change as you go higher and
higher in energy so that basically means
if you have some Collider and you bash
particles into each other the harder you
hit them into each other the the the
forces the strength Lee's forces alter
essentially and what you see in the
standard model if you do experiments at
higher and higher energies and these are
energies that way higher than we can
actually produce in an experiment but
this is done with theoretical
calculations you'll find that at some
very very high energy scale there is a
point where these three lines the
electromagnetic force the weak force and
the strong force sort of come together a
bit but not quite if you introduce
supersymmetry these lines meet rather
exactly at a particular place labeled
unification and this suggests that with
supersymmetry these three forces are
unified into some single you know over
overlying force which possibly should be
called the force
and so that's another reason for liking
supersymmetry unifies these three
apparently disparate forces into one
actually we've already unified these two
that's partly what the Higgs is involved
in but never mind rather it's just a
strong force the other thing the reason
to like supersymmetry is that we now
double the number of fundamental
particles to discover so people like me
are kept employed for a very long time
so that's that's good so we like
supersymmetry another possible theory so
this one tries to explain the weakness
of gravity's there are a number of
different versions of this out there
essentially these theories posit an
extra dimension of space or sometimes
more than one extra dimension of space
as a way of explaining the weakness of
gravity now this is apparently an image
of what extra dimensions look like I
mean okay I'm not so sure but yeah
apparently is anyway so essentially what
the idea is there are some extra
directions in which you can move then
the up and down left and right and
forwards and backwards and the reason
that we don't observe them is either
because the particles that we're made of
a stuck on are three dimensional sort of
space-time and only certain things can
travel through these high dimensions or
it's because these extra dimensions are
squished up very tiny and therefore
they're impossible to observe and the
way you explain the weakness of gravity
is usually by gravity leaking away into
these extra dimensions so gravity can
move through all of the dimensions of
space and therefore it's diluted whereas
electromagnetism is restricted to just
live inside these three dimensions that
we're familiar with and if you want to
know the results of having extra
dimensional theories like this this is
this is this is what an extra
dimensional Theory looks like according
to the Daily Express so you make a black
hole at CERN and it swallows the entire
world so we haven't seen that yet
actually this is what they really look
like so if you make basically an extra
dimensional theories often you can make
tiny black holes so this is where you
collide your particles with enough
energy they actually collapse a little
region of space-time for a tiny moment
into a black hole and the reason we're
not really worried about these black
holes eating the earth like in that
rather silly animation is the according
to Hawking's theory these black holes
should almost immediately evaporate so
as soon as they're created they just and
this is a simulation of one
these black holes disintegrating so the
black hole was here and it's turned into
a whole load of other particles and they
give a very characteristic signature in
your detector if you manage to make one
of these things and it's not the whole
world falling into a hole so this
finding the Higgs was one objective but
finding all these things was a really
big part of the reason the LHC was built
and I'm now going to take you on a brief
tour of this really extraordinary Sheen
so this is a map of Europe we're gonna
zoom in on Switzerland this is Lake
Geneva Geneva is just down here and
stands about therefore going a bit
closer this is an aerial shot from a
plane of the Geneva area so again you
can see Lake Geneva city of Geneva is
this kind of gray smudge this long thing
here is the airport runway turns over
there and they're marked in yellow on
the country side is the route of the
Large Hadron Collider so this is the the
largest scientific instrument ever built
by the human race by some measures is
the largest machine they ever built is
27 kilometers in circumference it
crosses the Swiss French border twice
it's actually this yellow line is not
there in real life it's about 100 meters
under the ground
the main reason it's underground is
actually not because it's dangerous and
somehow it emits lots of radiation it
need to be shielded from it's because
it'd be very expensive to buy 27
kilometers of land to build it on so
it's just below the surface and the way
it works is really quite simple and
rather brutal over here at CERN there is
a bottle of hydrogen gas about this
large which is plugged into a 30 meter
long particle accelerator and that
hydrogen is taken out of its canister
it's zapped with an electric field the
Hydra atoms are ripped apart the
electrons are ripped off the hydrogen
atoms and you're left with protons which
are just the nuclei of hydrogen atoms
and those are sent down an accelerator
and they're sent through a series of
accelerators at CERN so imagine kind of
whizzing round a number of different
loops eventually it goes into this ring
called the super proton synchrotron
which back in the 80s was the most was
the largest particle accelerator in the
world but now it's just a feeder for the
much bigger Large Hadron Collider so you
have a beam of protons that goes one
going this way one going the other way
and then four points around the ring
these protons are brought into collision
inside
antek three-dimensional digital cameras
that take photographs essentially of
these collisions and try to see if we've
created new particles so if you go
underground this is what you see very
very very long blue tube curving away
into the distance people actually use
they're about eight access shafts that
take you down to the tunnel people
actually use bicycles to get around
because the distances are so large so
this blue tube is essentially the
world's largest thermos flask inside it
there is a bath of liquid helium at
minus 271 degrees Celsius so it's about
just above tube a bit less than two
degrees that absolute zero the lowest
possible temperature and the reason it's
very cold is because the way that these
particles are steered around the ring
are using incredibly powerful magnets
and these magnets are superconducting
which means they have no electrical
resistance and that means you can create
extremely strong magnetic fields but
they only work at very very low
temperatures so the whole machine is
cooled down with liquid helium pumped
intravenously through this entire ring
so make the magnets operate the
engineering challenges in building this
are absolutely extraordinary too just to
give you give you one fact that I found
amazing when I learnt it is that so you
probably learn it maybe you remember
from school if you get a piece of metal
and you cool it down it gets a little
bit smaller it contracts slightly so
you're cooling down a 27 kilometer long
basically piece of metal by 271 degrees
and what happens when you do that is the
entire machine shrinks by 30 meters in
length so this this thing which has to
be aligned to you know kind of micron
level has to be able to contract by 30
meters without breaking and without
misaligning without going wrong and the
fact that it works is really amazing
this these are the other parts of
machines you have a very very long blue
tube and then at four places around the
ring this tunnel opens out into these
huge subterranean caverns that sort of
Cathedral sized and inside these caverns
are extraordinary looking machines like
this this is the compact muon solenoid
which is a strange use of the word
compact so this thing is 15 meters high
so there's a guy in a hardhat for scale
just there it's 20
25 meters long it weighs 12,000 tons it
contains enough iron to make two Eiffel
Towers essentially what this thing is is
incredibly sophisticated gigantic 3d
digital camera so what happens is the
particles the protons come in through
this beam pipe and in one for the other
direction this thing is barrel shape so
you imagine it goes off the edge of the
image they collide in the center you get
a whole load of stuff going everywhere
and this detector records those
collisions in real time actually 40
million times every second this is the
this is another one of these there's
four of these things this is the biggest
of all this is Atlas which is kind of a
rather is a good cool sounding name it's
a bit of a tortured acronym so I won't
try and tell you what it actually stands
for but essentially Atlas is even bigger
than CMS this thing is 25 meters high 40
meters long it's absolutely huge if you
ever get a chance to go to CERN and get
down underground to see these things
which i think is quite difficult sadly
these days because it's quite busy there
I mean when I saw them a few years ago
they really are the most amazing things
you'll ever seeing unbelievable so the
Atlas does essentially a very similar
job to CMS they're two different
experiments but they work on in print
they work on similar principles but have
completely independent teams and
independent technologies and they're
really there to cross check each other's
results so this is a representative
image of what happens when two particles
collide it's actually a real image so
this is what they've got the date on I
think so it says 2011 June 25th at 6:30
in the morning this has two protons
meeting what happens the reason we're
doing these collision experiments is
what we're actually doing is making
matter so there's you can often hear um
particle accelerators or colliders
described as atom smashers and that sort
of suggests that what we're doing is
breaking atoms apart in order to see
what's inside them but that's not really
what we're interested in people have
known what's inside atoms for quite a
long time now
what particle colliders actually are are
ways of making matter that doesn't
normally exist in the universe so you
load a huge amount of energy onto each
protons they're given huge speeds
they're going at 99.999999 1% of the
speed of light when they collide at this
point they're carrying 7,000
time's their rest mass energy as kinetic
energy so that means you can make
something essentially that is 14,000
times heavier than a proton in the
collision they come together the energy
their kinetic energy is converted into
matter and that's what you're seeing so
you're seeing hundreds of particles
being created and these are not things
that are coming from inside the proton
well in some cases they are but a lot of
it is stuff that's being made
essentially out of this kinetic energy
this happens this process of collisions
happens forty million times every second
inside all four of these experiments and
they run for most of the year so usually
from about April March through to just
before Christmas so 24 hours a day with
you know occasional technical stop so
you can get a sense of how many of these
collisions are produces absolutely vast
and the data challenges of coping with
this rate of collisions is really
extraordinary as well so I'm gonna try
and briefly now explain to you what that
bump was in that graph I showed you at
the beginning so how do you find a Higgs
boson well two protons collide and if
you're extremely lucky they will create
a Higgs particle now the Higgs particle
only lives for a tiny fraction of a
second I think it's some like 10 to the
minus 24 seconds so way way way too
short to be detected the Higgs doesn't
ever reach the detector it just is just
it's created and it disintegrates
instantly now one of the ways it can
decay is into two particles of light so
you get two high-energy photons two
gamma rays that fly out from the
collision point that came from this
Higgs decay and this is what this event
shows this is from Atlas again from 2011
so you can see these two big bars here
are two photons so what an analyst does
a physicist will say okay I'm looking
for the Higgs so go through all these
trillions and trillions of collisions
and find me all the collisions where
there were two high-energy photons
produced because they might have come
from a Higgs boson and then you take the
energy of those two photons you add them
together and you work out what was the
mass of the object which they came from
which was created right at the center of
this collision so you're kind of
reconstructing what the Higgs sort of
decayed into from the bits that you end
up flying through your detector it's a
bit like kind of blowing up a car and
trying to work out what kind of car it
was from the bits of
shrapnel ago flying past essentially and
what you then do is you take all these
pairs of photons you calculate the
energy the total energy and you plot it
on a graph and that's all this is so
it's just on the vertical axis you've
got the number of pairs of photons and
on the horizontal axis you've got the
total mass of the object they would have
come from now most of the time when you
see two photons they didn't come from a
Higgs they came from something else so
there's lots of ways of making photons
if you bang protons together very hard
you get light that's what happens so
most of the time it's just background
noise essentially and the reason the
bump is important is a certain mass
which is a hundred and twenty five times
more or less the mass of the proton you
can see this little excess and that's
because every time you make a Higgs the
Higgs is always the same a Higgs always
has the same mass so the photons from
the Higgs will always add up to the same
mass so you get a little excess at that
particular value so this bump is the
sign that this thing is really there and
the thing that really convinced everyone
on that day back in July 2012 was that
both experiments Atlas and CMS both saw
a bump in the same place and that was
what everyone stood when everyone really
got excited inside cheering so that's
great so the LHC switched on for the
first time successfully without blowing
yourself up in 2009 it ran for about two
and a half years until the Higgs was and
the Higgs announcement came in July 2012
and everyone was very very happy that
day but then since then there's been a
kind of a string of bad news this is a
this is a story from 2011 actually even
before the Higgs was found saying
certain results were sort of really
causing some problems for some of the
other theories that we were looking for
particularly supersymmetry so there were
some ideas when the LHC was first
switched on that there be so many
supersymmetric particles so many
sparticles who wouldn't be able to
handle them and now we won't be able to
read out the data quickly enough
actually what happened is there's
there's not been a sign of these things
at all so there's one tell us 11 this is
another one from 2015 LHC keeps bruising
difficult to kill supersymmetry popular
physic theory running out of hiding
places so you get the idea and this is
this is really honestly being the story
at
the last well last 400 four and a half
years five years now since the Higgs was
discovered we've we've done there's been
lots of very important physics being
done there gave me wrong so for example
one of the things Alice and CMS have
been doing is studying the Higgs and to
truly try to try and pin down is this
thing really the Standard Model Higgs
boson that Peter Higgs said should be
there or is it some other more exotic
type of thing potentially so maybe it's
a supersymmetric Higgs boson for example
but all those measurements seem to say
it actually is it looked very very like
the Standard Model Higgs boson and all
these other theories extra dimension of
supersymmetry so far there hasn't been
any sign of them and people I think have
honestly been getting a little bit
anxious about this there was a big
moment of excitement last back in 2016
it's the summer of 2016 a new bump
turned up I told you physicists like
bumps so this is a very similar plot to
the one I just showed you it's again
adding up pairs of photons from insides
in this case inside the Atlas experiment
and what they saw again was something
that maybe looked a bit like a bump and
it was at much higher mass this time so
the Higgs mass was about 125 protons
more or less this thing was about 750
protons so it was much much heavier and
this created a huge amount of excitement
at the time possibly a little bit
prematurely so the thing you have to be
very careful about an experimentalist
and generally physicists a whole lot
very cautious when they see something
like this because there is a certain
chance that this kind of bump could just
be a fluctuation it's just sometimes
just by random chance you might happen
to get a few more pairs of photons
produced at that mass and that's a bit
it's a bit like rolling a dice and
occasionally you might roll ten sixes in
a row even if that's very improbable if
you do enough experiments you'll get
that kind of result once in a while so
maybe this was just a statistical
fluctuation but people did get very
excited this showed this is a graph that
shows the excitement of physicists this
is so this result was announced around
the 15th of December 2015 and this is
the number of papers put on the archive
over the next 10 days so you can see
just by Christmas Eve there were almost
100 papers theoretical papers trying to
explain what this little wobble in a
graph was
so there was a huge amount of excitement
and I know maybe not justified as it
turned out it wasn't justified
unfortunately so when Atlas produced the
result again with more data what they
found was this little wiggle had
disappeared and essentially it was that
it seems it wasn't any missed never made
a mistake it wasn't that the experiment
had got it wrong just sometimes by you
know by luck or bad luck sometimes you
get a little fluctuation in your graph
and it makes it that makes you think
briefly that you've discovered something
new but actually you haven't sadly but I
said they were sort of something
interesting happening and it's actually
a series of results that have come out
of the experiment that I work on and I
can't claim to have been instrumental in
these measurements myself but it's been
very exciting being kind of an observer
in all of this so my experiment is
called the Large Hadron Collider beauty
experiment LHCb and beauty well beauty
stands for a particular type of particle
the be quark which is actually usually
referred to as the bottom quark but we
would rather be known as beauty
physicists at bottom physicists so it's
the Alexa V Beauty experiment it's not
as pretty as Allison CMS it does look a
bit like a multicolored toast rack or
something but it's a very very clever
experiment what LHCb does is really
rather different to the other two big
guys Allison CMS so broadly speaking
what Alice and CMS do are what we call
direct searches for new physics by which
I mean they want to bang protons
together so here's your one proton
another proton they're given lots of
energy they're smashed into each other
and then you make some new much heavier
particle and you observe it like the
Higgs for example and this kind of
direct process the the mass of the thing
that you can make is limited by how much
energy you can put into the collision so
if you remember you know Einstein's
equation e equals MC squared so that
tells us that energy and matter are
essentially interchangeable so if you
have e energy here in EE energy here
then the amount of mass you can make is
to e divided by the speed of light
squared so that tells you how heavy the
thing is that you can possibly create
and that's a that's one way of doing
physics and that's how the Higgs was
discovered and that's how a lot of the
Dark Matter searches all the
supersymmetry searches work as well what
LHCb does is
a bit different it does measurements
which are broadly speaking indirect now
as a sort of a silly analogy you all
heard the joke how do you know an
elephant's been in your fridge
footprints in the butter yeah exactly so
if you like Atlas and CMS hunting
elephants they're going out into the
jungle with a shotgun and trying to find
an elephant don't do that
and what HCB are doing actually is
trying to find footprints left by
elephants so in a way there's they're
kind of complementary in a sense they're
actually it might be quite if there
aren't very many elephants in the jungle
running across one might be quite quite
rare but if it leaves footprints all
over the place you might be able to
infer there's an elephant out there
although you may not know exactly what
type of elephant it is from just looking
at his footprints so that's the sort of
an analogy for what we're doing in terms
of the actual physics the B as I said
stands for B quark or bottom quark or
beautii quark so what we tend to study
are the ways that the beak walk can
decay so for example you have this green
blob represents a B quark and let's say
it can decay into some other set of
particles some three other particles
that it'll disintegrate into now in
standard model any decay process where
one particle turns into a bunch of
particles usually happens via the weak
force so this is the force that mediates
these kind of decay processes so
essentially this particle goes via the
weak force into these three particles
and just like you could use the standard
model to predict very accurately the
property of the electron I showed you
that a very long number at the beginning
you can also use it to work out how
often should it be quark to code turn
into these particular sets of particles
and you can count rate the number often
- quite a high level of accuracy now if
there exists some other force field
let's say there's a fifth force let's
just make it there it could be
supersymmetry it could be something else
if that force exists it can very subtly
influence the way these particles decay
it effectively provides another route
from the initial state into the final
state so the standard model might be the
most kind of the strongest the strongest
way of getting from you'll be quark into
your set of particles that you're
decaying into but your new physics can
also provide a route and that
essentially will slightly enhance the
decay rates of what the kind of game we
we play is we measure these sorts of
decay rates how often does a B quark
turn into some set of particles and we
compare that number with what the
standard model tells us it ought to be
and if that number disagrees that can be
an indirect hint there's some other
matter from other particles some other
force field is coming in and helping
that decay along so it says sort of
precision physics rather than going out
and banging things into each other and
looking for some big particle you're
creating you're studying much more
abundant these are still created in
collisions I mean we're still banging
things into each other you make but the
thing with the B quark is you make
billions and billions and billions of
them so you can make very very precise
measurements and you can detect
potentially these very subtle effects
caused by new forces that lie beyond the
edge of even beyond the energy that the
collider can reach actually so that's
the advantage of indirect measurements
it's complimentary to what Alice and CMS
do now the the thing that's been really
interesting in the last couple of years
are tests of something that sounds a bit
arcane called lepton universality this
is essentially a property of the
standard model which is the leptons
which are the electron the muon and the
Tau these three negatively charged
particles so they're each heavier than
the other the electrons when we found
100 years ago has a heavier version the
muon an even heavier version called the
towel and in the standard model all
three of these particles are treated
identically so that means that all the
forces interact with these three
particles pretty much in exactly the
same way and that means if you compare
two processes that say involve electrons
and muons they should have exactly the
same rate more or less and what we've
been looking at LHCb
is this process so you have your be
your beauty quark and it decays via the
weak force into a strange quark and two
electrons so that's the decay it's from
one particle into three and the two
electrons the crucial bit odd things to
pay attention to now a test of this idea
a test of lepton universality the fact
the standard model treats all of these
different versions of the electron the
same that tells us that if we look at a
corresponding decay where the B quark
turns
into a strange cork and two muons which
are the heavier versions of the electron
then the rate of this should be exactly
the same as the rate of this and when
people started to think about this
measurement there wasn't any really very
good reason to think that it was going
to produce anything interesting it was
kind of a it's good to test it the
lepton universality is a sort of a
principle of a standard model so it's
good to test these things just to make
sure and what they found was this is
what the standard model says if you if
you take the number of muon decays and
decay divide it by the number of
electron decays they should be equal so
what the standard model says is the
number more or less should be 1 - quite
a high level of precision in 2014 LHC be
produced the paper and this is what they
measured so that's that's even balance
between Aeons electrons they measured
0.75 plus or minus 0.1 so it seemed that
there were fewer muon decays than
electron decays
now this isn't yet anything to get
terribly excited about so you if you
look at the uncertainty its 0.1 this
number is only 0.25 away from one so
that means you only need to kind of I
talked about these fluctuations that can
fool you into thinking you found
something new it wouldn't take a very
big fluctuation just to send your number
down a bit and make it look like you've
seen something something new and
interesting so there was definite
interest in this it's what we call a
sort of 2 Sigma effect which means it's
about two errors away from what you
expect it to be and there were lots of
papers produced in 2014 as a result of
this then just this year the experiment
produced a equivalent measurement so
it's with a slightly different set of
particles but basically the same basic
thing so comparing muons and electrons
and this is what they measured so they
measure 0.68 plus or minus point naught
8 so this is a little bit further away
from one it's suspicion is very close as
well to what was measured in 2014 these
are two independent measurements though
so they're not using the same data
they're using different sets of data the
fact that they line up like this is
quite intriguing and it's caused
really quite serious interest so these
these measurements are at the moment the
the biggest deviations from the standard
model anywhere in any experiment that
we're aware of and it's not just these
there are a few other measurements as
well of similar sorts of processes that
all show slight discrepancies with the
standard model nothing independently yet
to really be sure that it's something
new but they all seem to be lining up in
a consistent way and people are still
going at you rightly being very cautious
cuz it could be when these measurements
are updated in a year or two that it
goes back to one that it was just you
know some statistical fluke or maybe we
made a mistake maybe we've missed some
systemic effect in the experiment
hopefully that's not the case but that's
always possible so it could be that
these things will disappear but the
other possibility is it's not a
statistical fluctuation we haven't
messed up this is actually the sign of
something really fundamentally new and
what's interesting is it's something
that no one really expected either it's
not supersymmetry and it's not large
extra dimensions it's something else and
that in a way would be even more
exciting because finding something that
you really didn't expect is quite often
when the biggest breakthroughs happen
so what could this be well there are not
there were lots as I said I showed you
that graph with a hundred papers for
that previous bump there are something
like 450 papers now out there citing
these two results from LHC being a
number of other results as well I'll
mention just one and that's partly
because it's a theory that some of my
colleagues at the Cavendish laboratory
have been talking about again very
cautiously so what their line is it's
extremely unlikely that this is a real
effect because the standard model works
so well if we're going to say that it's
broken in some way that requires really
extraordinary evidence but if this is
real then it could be telling us
something really really fundamental and
it's a question that in a way that's
been slightly ignored and it's back to
this pit this picture again this picture
the standard model that we had at the
beginning so I said that there are these
three generations the Quayle coming up
co-op and down quark and the electron
and then this charm and the strange
quark and the muon the top and the
bottom quark and the tower and I said we
don't know why there are three
generations we don't know why there are
these
articles well one of the possible
explanations of this discrepancy could
explain this structure so what we might
be on the edge of finding is some
extension of the standard model that
will a bit like the discovery of the
electron in the 19th century explained
this peculiar periodic table of
particles that we currently have at a
deeper level it essentially involves
invoking an additional force a new very
strong force a high energy and that
would it would also imply some other
very interesting things apart from
possibly being a clue to explain this
problem it would also tell us that the
Higgs is not an elementary particle at
all it's not fundamental is actually
made of other things other strongly
interacting exotic particles so we would
really change fundamentally our
understanding of the standard model and
it would be very exciting if this does
turn out to be real now people on my
experiment are working very hard
everyone's trying to get into this area
as you can imagine including me so I'm
starting to sort of do measurements like
they were trying to do measurements like
this there will be updates to these
papers quite soon so probably within the
next year certainly within the next year
or so so the answer to this question
should be should be should be coming in
very short order so either we're going
to confirm this effect or it's going to
disappear and we're all going to get
very depressed but hopefully it's the
first or not the second but it is a very
exciting time to be in particle physics
so definitely keep your eyes peeled over
the next year or two because we should
get an answer either way thanks very
much
you